# Recession_forest_models

There is a long tradition in business cycle analysis of separating periods in which there is broad economic growth, called expansions, from periods of broad economic contraction, called recessions. Understanding these phases and the transitions between them has been the focus of much macroeconomic research over the past century. 

In the United States, the National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER) establishes a chronology of “turning point” dates at which the shifts between expansion and recession phases occur. The chronology identifies the dates of peaks and troughs that frame economic recessions and expansions. These dates are nearly universally used in work requiring a definition of U.S. business cycle phases.  

This study compares two widely used recession forecasting models. The first approach is a dynamic factor time series model that captures expansion and recession phases as unobserved regime shifts in the mean of the common factor. The unobserved state variable controlling the regime shifts is modeled as following a Markov process as in Hamilton (1989). This dynamic-factor Markov-switching model (DFMS), as developed in Chauvet (1998), produces a probability that the economy is in an expansion or a recession at any point in time. These probabilities can then be used to establish turning point dates using a rule for converting probabilities into a binary variable defining which regime the economy is in at any particular time.

The second approach is a non-parametric long short-term memory (LSTM) neural network, which is an artificial recurrent neural network (RNN) architecture used in the field of deep learning. It was first proposed by Sepp Hochreiter and Jürgen Schmidhuber (1997) to deal with the vanishing gradient problem  that can occur when training a traditional RNN. RNN is a construct of connections between nodes that form a directed graph along a temporal sequence. This allows it to exhibit temporal dynamic behavior. For this, LSTM neural networks are well-suited to deal with time series prediction problems.
